
--- SOURCE: https://www.therapistaid.com/therapy-article/what-is-loneliness ---

Loneliness is what we feel when there’s too much space—real or imagined—between ourselves and others.

Many artists and authors have attempted to capture the essence of this emotion. Jack Kerouac’s novel On the Road is one example. The main character is visiting friends while on a cross-country road trip. When it’s time to go, he’s gripped by loneliness: “What is that feeling when you’re driving away from people and they recede on the plain till you see their specks dispersing? It’s the too-huge world vaulting us, and it’s good-bye.”

When loneliness strikes, we’re painfully aware of the space between ourselves and others, a “too-huge world” that can seem too wide to cross. Many life situations bring up this feeling, such as when a relationship ends, when we move to a new place, or when we don’t feel appreciated or understood by those around us.

Whatever the trigger, loneliness is the gravitational pull we feel toward companionship and community. Although often uncomfortable, loneliness contains great wisdom, because it reminds us of our need for human connection and motivates us to seek it out.

Feeling lonely is about more than our proximity to others. Loneliness can strike when we’re physically alone, but it can also happen when we’re around others and feel unappreciated or misunderstood.

This makes loneliness different from merely being alone. The chart below highlights this distinction:

Loneliness and being alone can exist independently of one other, but they can also occur together. For example, some people feel lonely, but aren’t physically alone, while others are both lonely and alone.

Loneliness tends to feel uncomfortable, empty, and anxiety-provoking. Feeling cut off from others puts our nervous systems into an alarm state. We’re hard-wired for connection, so we interpret a lack of connection as a threat.

When anxiety is present, rumination or intrusive thoughts can easily follow. These tend to take the form of self-blame (“It’s my fault I’m lonely”) or dire predictions for the future (“I’ll always be lonely” or “I’ll never find someone who likes me”). Unless challenged, these thoughts can lead to sadness, substance use, or even depression, adding to the burden of loneliness. When that happens, people often withdraw, which usually worsens their loneliness.

Shame is yet another sister emotion to loneliness. When shame hits, we might feel that loneliness is embarrassing or humiliating, something we shouldn’t be feeling. Even if this isn’t true, it’s easy to believe when under the sway of loneliness.

While loneliness can feel uncomfortable, it’s not always without value. Loneliness reminds us of the beauty of shared experiences with others. Without this reminder, it’s easy to overlook the importance of connection and community.

Childhood experiences can predispose us to feel lonely as adults. The first relationship we know is that with our caregivers. If this relationship was loving, reliable, and responsive, we’re more likely to trust and commit to relationships as adults. This is known as “secure attachment.” Those with secure attachment tend to be less lonely.

By contrast, if our relationship with our caregivers was inconsistent, unstable, or abusive, we’re apt to distrust future relationships. Early experiences of relationship betrayal or turmoil also play a role. This leads to “insecure attachment” and typically means being overly anxious about relationships or very hesitant to commit to them. Either response can lead to loneliness.

An insecure attachment style isn’t etched in stone. With time and effort, people can work toward secure attachment and feel lonely less often. It’s also normal to experience insecure attachment from time to time, even if one had loving and attentive parents.

Relationship loss is a common culprit. This could be the loss of a friendship, romantic partner, family member, or community. When our connection to others is severed, we immediately feel its lack. Since life is full of loss, we’re destined to feel lonely in these moments.

Loneliness can also stem from illness, disability, poverty, having few social outlets, and feeling unfulfilled at work. Life transitions, such as retirement or major moves, also play a role.

Loneliness has been on the rise for years in the United States. One study showed that nearly half of American adults feel lonely on a daily basis. What’s behind this epidemic of loneliness?

One explanation is our culture’s emphasis on individualism over communities. In the past, there was more support for community outlets organized around common interests. Today, many people live more solitary lives. We often spend more time with people online than in person, which can make us feel more distant.

Certain social styles can make loneliness more likely. For example, introverts often avoid social interactions, particularly large groups. This means introverts may experience loneliness more frequently than extroverts, who are typically more willing to invest themselves socially.

We tend to push away loneliness by doing things like staying excessively busy, zoning out on our phones, binge-watching TV, using food or substances, and rushing into a relationship before we’re ready.

These are understandable responses, but they usually make loneliness worse. When it comes to uncomfortable emotions, what we resist will persist.

In other words, the harder you push away an emotion, the more you’ll end up trapped in it. You can probably recall a time when you tried to repress an uncomfortable emotion, only to find that it stayed with you, stewing beneath the surface.

A paradox is at play here: The best way to get past loneliness is to allow yourself to feel it fully. Without fully accepting what you’re feeling, you can end up forever running from your experience.

This doesn’t mean you never do something about loneliness. It just means you first allow yourself to experience loneliness without pushing it away. You’re then better equipped to take steps to change your situation for the better.

When we feel lonely, we often assume there’s something wrong with us. We may even believe we’re not worthy of love and connection.

Just as we can change our resistance to loneliness, we can also change how we think about it. Have a look at how different interpretations of loneliness lead to different outcomes for two individuals:

Person A blames themselves and assumes their loneliness will last forever. By contrast, person B blames their circumstances and assumes their loneliness is just temporary. These different outlooks lead to very different consequences: Person A withdraws or isolates themselves, while person B feels motivated to take positive action.

This example shows how your mindset can dramatically impact how intensely and frequently you feel lonely.

Emotions are often more complex than they appear at first glance. Loneliness is no exception.

To understand an emotion, we have to grasp the purpose it serves. When it comes to loneliness, that purpose is to motivate us to seek out meaningful connections with others. In this sense, loneliness is a helpful compass that points us in the direction of companionship and community.

Loneliness is only a problem when it persists for a long time and negatively affects well-being. When that happens, it’s important to take action. A good first step is to allow yourself to feel lonely without resisting it. This helps you avoid needlessly prolonging loneliness by pushing it away.

These strategies improve loneliness by deepening your connections with others, changing how you think about loneliness, and helping you share with greater openness and authenticity.


--- SOURCE: https://www.therapistaid.com/therapy-article/how-to-build-resilience ---

These quotes sound nice, but might leave you wondering: How? How do I get back on the horse, make lemonade, or try again? The answer lies in resilience.

Resilience means using inner strength to work through and grow from challenges and crises. This is what allows a person to “bounce back” after anything from a minor rejection to a major life setback.

No one is born resilient—it's a learned skill. With practice, anyone can become resilient.
More than anything, resilience comes from mindset. By controlling how you think about a situation, you can control how you respond to it.

During times of crisis, it’s common to feel overwhelmed and powerless. It may feel like everything is out of control, and there’s nothing you can do. For this reason, it’s beneficial to recognize that there are things within your control. Resilience comes from managing the things within your control while accepting the things you cannot control.

Acceptance won’t necessarily come easily, but you can work toward it. For example, practicing mindfulness can help you accept things as they are, without trying to change them or push them away. Focusing on what you can control is a skill, and the more you practice, the better you will get.

There are countless ways to view the events in your life. Depending on the perspective you take, the same situation might carry completely different meanings.

Resilience comes from viewing hardships as opportunities for growth. This mindset is developed by looking for the upside of difficult situations—even when that is hard to do. This doesn’t mean you see the situation as entirely positive (or even mostly positive). Instead, you recognize there are at least some positive things you can take from the situation.

When facing a crisis, it’s natural to want to avoid the uncomfortable feelings that come with it. For example, after losing a job, it might feel bad to reflect on your mistakes, or to share the bad news with loved ones. Skipping these steps means not having to face discomfort... for now.

In the long run, avoidance leaves the root problems unresolved, allowing them to grow or recur.

Confronting difficult experiences is key to developing resilience. Being present to your difficult experience—rather than pushing it away—gives you the chance to work through problems. The more you practice confronting challenges, the more confidence you gain in facing similar challenges in the future.

Values are the things that are most important to you in life. Understanding your values can help build resilience. When you’re just going through the motions and doing things without passion, it’s easy to throw in the towel as soon as things get difficult. In contrast, when you know what you’re fighting for, you’re better equipped to push through even the most challenging situations.

To discover your values, consider times you felt happy, focused, or energized. What did these situations have in common? What values does this reveal? Use your values to motivate you through future challenges.

Resilience is about working through challenges and coming out even stronger. You can develop resilience by focusing on what you can control, adopting a growth mindset, facing your fears, and defining your values.


--- SOURCE: https://www.therapistaid.com/therapy-article/social-media-and-self-esteem ---

Does social media lift you up or drag you down? Whether social media is a force for good or ill in your life likely comes down to how you use and relate to it. A more intentional and balanced relationship with social media allows you to enjoy the benefits of online interactions while avoiding hits to your self-esteem and well-being.

To achieve this, it’s important to take a close look at your social media usage. Use the questions below for a social media check-up. If you answer “yes” to a question, review the recommendations and make any needed tune-ups.

It’s a warning sign if you’re feverishly monitoring the number of likes on your posts. Fishing for praise from others can boost your self-esteem, but it’s often temporary and ultimately unsatisfying.

It’s a red flag if your mood and self-esteem plunge after your social media sessions. An easy way to gauge the health of your social media usage is to keep tabs on how it makes you feel.

Social media often creates the illusion that everyone is living a fabulous life. If you compare yourself to this unrealistic standard, your self-esteem could take a major hit.

Arguments are part of being human. But social media algorithms amplify conflict, pushing people to embrace more extreme positions.

If you’re frequently drooling over others’ posts of five-star meals, exotic travel, and carefully posed glamour shots, you may want to prove your own life is equally spectacular. But convincing others of your greatness can become a full-time job, sapping your mood and energy.

Is your school or work performance suffering? Are you skipping in-person time with friends? Are you spending all your free time online? If “yes,” slow your scroll and check out the recommendations below.

There’s a reason you can’t pry yourself away from social media: Likes, alerts, and notifications are designed to trigger a dopamine release that your brain craves. But these fleeting pleasures can quickly become hollow.

Remember that the goal is improvement, not perfection. There’s probably no one who uses social media in a perfectly healthy way all the time. And that’s okay.

What’s important is to identify how your social media use is problematic, and then take small, but consistent steps toward regaining balance and aligning with your values, both online and offline. This opens the door to a richer, more empowering social media experience.

It’s a good idea to repeat the social media check-up periodically to keep you on track.


--- SOURCE: https://www.therapistaid.com/therapy-article/grief-rituals ---

Loss is unavoidable on the human journey. Where there is loss, grief follows. Grief can be overwhelming due to the intensity of emotions involved. In the aftermath of a major loss, people often struggle to return to their routines in a way that honors and makes space for their bereavement.

Grief rituals offer a powerful means of working with and healing from loss that can be incorporated into daily life. Personalized grief rituals allow for greater flexibility, customization, and repetition. This article presents an easy-to-follow template for designing a grief ritual tailored to your particular loss. Carrying out such a ritual is an empowering and hands-on way of working with your grief.

A grief ritual may not be appropriate in some cases. Consult with a professional before conducting a grief ritual if you struggle with depression, suicidality, or other mental health issues, or if you feel ill-equipped to handle the intense emotions that may arise.

Any event or activity with structure, intention, and an element of the sacred can be a ritual. Some examples include meditating each morning, singing “happy birthday” at a celebration, or planting and tending a memorial garden. Regardless of the content, rituals create a space to honor what matters most and to welcome insight, growth, and healing.

The English word “grief” derives from a Latin word that means “heavy,” “weighty,” and “burdensome.” Rituals help alleviate the burden of grief after a major loss. They do this by promoting acceptance of the loss, emotional expression, and a feeling of control.

Rituals also help maintain a bond with what has been lost and provide an opportunity for reflecting on how to go forward. Carrying out a ritual connects a person to whatever they consider sacred, be it a higher power, a state of consciousness, or their most cherished values.

To be effective, a grief ritual should be tailored to your particular loss, belief system, and immediate environment. Below are steps you can follow to design a grief ritual that is right for your situation. Feel free to make adjustments based on your culture, setting, and religious or spiritual beliefs.

Grief rituals benefit from incorporating a meaningful physical object. If possible, select an object with a connection to your loss. If you are grieving the loss of a loved one or relationship, this might be a cherished piece of jewelry, an article of clothing they wore, a gift they gave you, a letter they wrote, or a photograph.

If your loss does not involve a person, you may still be able to find an object related to the loss. For example, if you are grieving the end of a job, you could choose an object from that role—a pen, ID card, uniform, or business card. If you are unable to think of an object, select something with symbolic value from the natural environment—a rock, flower, seashell, or feather.

Rituals should have an element of sacredness to distinguish them from mundane activities, such as getting dressed, cleaning, or driving to work. Lighting a candle, visiting a special place, or reciting a prayer, mantra, or intention are all good options for marking the start and conclusion of your ritual and emphasizing its sacredness.

Rituals should also include steps performed in a certain order. This provides a structure that guides you through the ritual, which can be helpful if you are overwhelmed with emotion.

Research suggests that connecting with your body can help with expressing and processing difficult emotions, which is one of the most important benefits of a grief ritual. Incorporating movement into your grief ritual can be an effective way to do this.

A walk in nature—even if just around the block or in a park—can serve this function. If you are mourning the loss of a person, you might walk in a place that reminds you of them. Some find it meaningful to visit the site where their loved one died or where their remains are located.

If it is not possible to go for a walk, consider whether there are other ways to use movement in your ritual. For example, you could dance to a song that speaks to your loss. If you live near water where it is safe to swim, you could immerse yourself or tread water as part of your ritual.

Rather than just having an object present, grief experts recommend using the object in some way. This symbolizes moving the pain of grief to a place where it can be worked with and transformed.

For example, if you wrote a letter expressing your feelings about a relationship that ended, you could shred and bury it as a way of releasing your emotions. If you chose a rock as your object, imagine your anger or guilt being absorbed into it, and then drop the rock into deep water as a way of letting go of what burdens you. If your object is a feather, place it in a stream, and watch as it slowly fades from view. Take adequate time to feel and express any emotions that come up in your grief ritual.

Another option is to create a small altar somewhere in your home. Place your chosen object on the altar and treat it as a sacred space where you can regularly meditate, pray, or sit in quiet contemplation.

After performing your ritual, create a sense of closure before returning to your day. Some good options are reciting a mantra, expressing an intention, praying, meditating, or extinguishing a candle you lit to begin the ritual. This helps mark the end of your ritual and the return to your normal activities.

Rituals often increase in power and significance when repeated. If your ritual is elaborate or time-consuming, it may make sense to repeat it on an occasional basis, such as on the anniversary of the loss. But simpler rituals can often be integrated into your daily life. For example, you could light a candle and meditate or pray each morning to start your day. Or you could go on a short walk in the evenings as a way of reflecting on your loss. Experiment with what works best for you.

Below are examples of how two people designed effective grief rituals using the previously outlined steps:

Daniel is struggling in the months following his divorce. He is devastated by the end of his marriage, but also angry and hurt, especially about his ex-wife's affair. Here’s how Daniel created a ritual to work with his grief:

Marisa is heartbroken after losing her older sister, Gabriela. In addition to mourning her sister’s passing, Marisa is sad that she did not get a chance to say goodbye. This is how Marisa designed and carried out a ritual to aid her grief process:

Your grief ritual can and should look different from these examples, as it will be unique to your loss, beliefs, and preferences. Be creative as you decide how to incorporate the elements mentioned in the article.

Remember to include each of the outlined steps in whatever ritual you choose: Choose a meaningful object, make it sacred, incorporate movement, interact with chosen object, and create closure and repeat.

While not a cure for loss, carrying out a well-designed personal grief ritual has many potential benefits, such as helping you accept the loss, process your emotions, have a sense of control, and maintain your bond with the deceased, among others. Repeating your ritual and making it part of your routine can increase these benefits and give meaning and structure to your life.


--- SOURCE: https://www.therapistaid.com/therapy-article/creating-secure-attachment ---

Healthy relationships require the right mix of intimacy and independence. Those with insecure attachment struggle to get this balance right. They either worry excessively about their relationships or hold themselves back from fully committing to their partners.

Shaped largely by early childhood experiences, insecure attachment can persist throughout the lifespan, affecting the quality and outcome of adult relationships. Thankfully, those with insecure attachment can learn to trust and commit to their relationships by adopting new beliefs and behaviors.

Learn about the four main attachment styles as well as the associated thoughts and behaviors. This empowers you to spot trends in your relationship history and make a plan to break unhelpful patterns.

Views about relationships tend to get set early in life. If your caregivers were unsafe or neglectful, you’ll likely be distrustful of your adult relationships. For that reason, it’s important to investigate what is actually true about your current relationships and abandon outdated beliefs and interpretations.

Next time you hesitate to trust or commit to your partner, try to find evidence that justifies your concern. Consider that you may be projecting experiences from past relationships onto your current relationship.

Those with insecure attachment tend to cling to their relationships (anxious style) or hold themselves aloof from them (avoidant style). If you have an anxious style, try taking small steps toward becoming more independent. If you have an avoidant style, try letting down your guard and initiating intimacy.

The goal is to find the sweet spot where you have healthy levels of both intimacy and independence. It’s hard work to break a pattern, but remind yourself of the many rewards of improving your relationships.

If you’re unable to manage and work with your emotions, you’ll likely be more reactive in your relationships, which decreases attachment security. Learning to express and tolerate your emotions makes you better able to empathize with those of your partner.

Working toward a secure attachment requires communicating your hopes, fears, and concerns in a respectful, open-hearted way. Non-verbal communication is equally important. Eye contact, nodding, and physical contact can help defuse tension when used skillfully. When conflict does happens, listen empathetically to your partner and determine how you can help each other feel understood and connected, even if you disagree.

If you want to run a marathon, it’s helpful to surround yourself with successful runners. In the same way, you can improve your relationships by learning about how people with healthy relationships think and behave. Notice or ask how these individuals set appropriate boundaries in their partnerships.

If you don’t have a partner, remember that seeking someone who is securely attached can make it easier in your own journey toward secure attachment. If you’re in a relationship, reflect on areas where improvement is needed.

Stress can worsen attachment issues, even among those with secure attachment. This is particularly true of relationship-related turmoil, such as frequent arguments or the prospect of separation or divorce. Be proactive by committing to self-care, addressing conflict before it escalates, and engaging in calming activities with your partner.

To summarize, these are the steps you can take to work toward secure attachment and improve your relationship satisfaction:

These actions work with thoughts, emotions, and behaviors, giving you an integrated approach to breaking old patterns and becoming more securely attached.

As you work toward secure attachment, keep this principle in mind: Relationship harmony revolves around skillfully expressing your attachment needs and discerning those of your partner. Set aside regular time to reflect on how you and your partner can help each other feel respected, understood, and loved. With consistent effort, this practice can lead to greater intimacy and a more fulfilling relationship.


--- SOURCE: https://www.therapistaid.com/therapy-article/what-is-gaslighting ---

Gaslighting is a type of manipulation that causes a person to doubt their own beliefs, sanity, or memory.

Gaslighters undermine the trust a person has in their reality. They create a world in which the victim’s point of view is untrustworthy, dysfunctional, or wrong.

Rather than a single event, gaslighting tends to occur over weeks or years. The gaslighter steadily chips away at the victim’s self-confidence and well-being. Over time, the victim’s self-doubt can lead them to feel confused, scared, and unhappy.

Gaslighting can occur in romantic relationships, friendships, families, and in the workplace.

Gaslighting is often used as a method of control over another person. When someone begins to doubt their own memory or sanity, they may come to depend on the gaslighter to make sense of things. In this way, the gaslighter is elevated to a position of power or authority.

Additionally, gaslighting invalidates the victim’s point of view. The victim is made out to be wrong or not to be trusted, so that the gaslighter always has the upper hand in the relationship. The gaslighter becomes the only one in the relationship who can be trusted.

The gaslighter convinces the victim they are wrong, misremembering, or are mentally unwell. They might say things such as “that never happened” or “you’re crazy.” Initially, the victim may not be convinced. However, the gaslighter is persistent, and over time the victim comes to believe the gaslighter’s point of view.

Gaslighters often enlist others—friends, children, or other family members—to bolster support for their tactics. For example, they may tell others that the victim is “crazy” and is not to be trusted.

A victim of gaslighting is likely to feel deep self-doubt. Additionally, they may feel confused, hurt, and sad.


--- SOURCE: https://www.therapistaid.com/therapy-article/covid-and-collective-grief ---

The suffering caused by COVID-19 is staggering. Around 6.3 million people have died worldwide from the contagion, with the U.S. death toll coming in at over one million and counting. Anxiety and depression have increased globally by twenty-five percent since the beginning of the pandemic, while depression rates have tripled in the United States, afflicting every third American adult. Behind the statistics are real human beings—mothers, fathers, sons, daughters, sisters, brothers.

The countless private griefs of the COVID pandemic have accumulated into a reservoir of collective sorrow. The losses extend far beyond the death toll. We have lost relationships, jobs, school, safety, trust in government, activities that give our lives meaning, and the ability to prioritize what unites us over what divides us. To recover, we must come together as a community to mourn these tragedies.

This article describes the many types of grief the pandemic has unleashed, while exploring how private pain can be healed through meaningful communal rituals.

Many think of grief as involving the loss of a loved one. But we can also grieve the loss of friendship, community, dreams, jobs, and any meaningful activity. COVID has caused or worsened many of these less obvious griefs.

To help us understand grief’s varied expressions, psychotherapist and grief specialist Francis Weller (2015) proposes five major “gates,” or ways, through which grief enters our lives.

Weller’s first gate—everything we love we will lose—is perhaps the most obvious. The pandemic has reminded us that human life is incredibly fragile and transitory. Caught up in our daily routines, it can seem like everything is safe and secure. In reality, we are always just a hair’s breadth away from loss.

While this truth can be difficult to accept, it refocuses our attention on what matters. Grief often reveals the futility of worldly pursuits, such as material possessions or social status. This motivates us to live according to our highest values and appreciate every opportunity for connection. In this sense, the grief caused by COVID is a call to be mindful of each passing moment, to take nothing for granted.

The second gate of grief refers to the parts of us that have not been acknowledged, accepted, or loved. This could be related to our bodies, race, sexuality, identity, or traits that were not welcomed in our families, relationships, and communities. When any important part of ourselves is not validated, we struggle to feel whole, opening the door to grief.

The political and social divisions that escalated during the pandemic brought these wounds to the surface. In the COVID era, many experienced a lack of tolerance or outright animosity from those with opposing views and values. This reminded many of past instances of being criticized, judged, or shamed, adding another layer to the grief we currently face.

While our differences are real, we have lost sight of what we have in common—the need to feel loved, respected, and supported; the ache to belong unconditionally. Weller (2015) asserts that community can offer this by serving as the “holding space for our most painful stories.” The implication is that healing happens when we see our private pain as inseparable from the suffering of the community.

COVID has given us a close-up view of the sorrows of the world—Weller's third gate. This includes the unequal distribution of vaccines, the plight of the impoverished, the interruption of schooling and social lives, and the myriad ways in which the pandemic has contributed to human suffering. Disturbing images of overwhelmed hospitals, individuals straining to breathe, and family members separated from their sick loved ones have left an indelible mark.

These sorrows cry out for public acknowledgment and processing as a first step toward healing. Many are beginning to do this by connecting with others around their COVID-related grief. For example, a volunteer-run online memorial allows the bereaved to post tributes and stories about loved ones lost to COVID. A memorial wall in London features thousands of pink and red hearts commemorating victims of the pandemic. In Bergamo, Italy, oxygen-producing trees were planted in a park next to a hospital to honor the city’s COVID victims who perished there. These projects provide a communal space to process individual grief and view it as part of an interconnected web of loss.

Weller’s fourth gate of grief entails what we expected but did not receive. This includes dreams, hopes, and plans that did not come to fruition. COVID pressed pause on many people’s lives, causing them to miss weddings, funerals, and other social rituals. Children could not go to class; high schoolers missed out on prom and graduation events; workers lost their jobs; relationships suffered in the claustrophobic confines of lockdown.

Missing out on communal activities has led many into isolation, which Weller (2015) views as a key driver of grief: “What was once a seamless intermingling of body, family, community, clan, ecology, and cosmos has been reduced to a narrow realm where we live as an isolated cell.” This loss of community involves not just events, but also the simple experience of being in close physical contact with others.

While devastating, the isolation of the pandemic has been a reminder of how individual well-being depends on remaining connected to others. Our lives gradually lose color if we cannot share our experiences with those we care about. As Weller (2015) puts it, “We are designed to anticipate a certain quality of welcome, engagement, touch, and reflection.” When these needs are not met, grief follows.

Our interconnectedness with those who came before us is the key focus of Weller’s fifth and final gate—ancestral grief. This type of grief encompasses experiences of violence, genocide, racism, and other traumas our ancestors endured. According to Weller (2015), we carry the burden of our forebearers’ tribulations. For disadvantaged groups, COVID was a painful reminder of long-standing societal inequalities, such as lacking health care access among immigrants, indigenous peoples, and communities of color.

The isolation and societal division brought into stark relief by COVID reflect the loneliness of living outside of community. “In a very real way,” writes Weller (2015), “we have lost our connection to the land, language, imagination, rituals, songs, and stories of our ancestors.”

But it is this realization that can motivate us to build deeper communal bonds and address social injustices. One thing is for sure: We cannot meet the challenges of the contemporary world as isolated individuals. Only community can save us.

Expressing grief in community is crucial to healing the many losses described in this article. When shared with others, grief can tear down our defenses and open our hearts. Ritual is a powerful means of working with our pain in a way that connects us to others. Mourning with others “offers us the means of tending wounds and sorrows, for offering gratitude, and for reconciling conflicts” (Weller, 2015).

Communal grief rituals come in many forms. Reminiscing with others about those we have lost is a ritual. Praying or meditating with others around a common point of focus is another variation. Even psychotherapy is a kind of ritual in which suffering is shared, explored, and healed in the presence of another person. Regardless of the type of ritual, the crucial element is that two or more people join together to pay tribute to their losses through a collective act, such as sharing stories or observing silence. In the sacred space of ritual, our private grief becomes part of a communal experience that eases our burden and cements our belonging with others.

As the pandemic slowly retreats, we must seek out opportunities to share in this way with others. While the desire to return to normalcy is understandable, COVID has irrevocably altered us. Grief rituals empower us to navigate our new collective reality, honor our many losses, and find solace and support through community. If collectively acknowledged, grief carries the promise of renewal and reinvigoration.

If you would like to learn more about grief, see our handouts on The Grieving Process, The Tasks of Mourning, the Grief Fact Sheet, and our guide on Grief Psychoeducation.


--- SOURCE: https://www.therapistaid.com/therapy-article/how-to-practice-self-compassion ---

Self-compassion means showing kindness to yourself. It means accepting yourself for who you are, imperfections and all.

Self-compassion does not mean giving up on growth and self-improvement. Instead, it's about understanding that you are a work in progress, with strengths and weaknesses, and knowing that is okay.

Imagine your best friend just went through a break-up. They tell you the story, and you listen from start to finish. Your friend isn't perfect, but they deserve to be happy. You reassure them that they’ll get through this, they’re a catch, and they'll be okay.

You don’t judge your friend. You don’t tell them they are not worthy, or that they need to change. You show your friend compassion.

For many people, it’s easy to show compassion to others. Family, friends, pets, strangers, and even TV characters are met with kindness and understanding, despite their flaws.

At the same time, many compassionate people are critical and unforgiving of themselves. They hold themselves to a standard they would never demand from others. They struggle to practice self-compassion.

There are no simple tricks for developing self-compassion, but there are several healthy habits that may help.

Practicing self-compassion means treating yourself warmly, gently, and fairly. It’s about having an attitude of acceptance toward yourself—rather than judgment—and treating yourself accordingly.

Imagine receiving some constructive criticism from your boss. Coming from a place of judgment, you only hear the negative, and tell yourself, “I’m an idiot. I can’t do anything right.” Coming from a place of fairness and acceptance, you hear the whole message, and tell yourself, “There are definitely things I can work on, but I’m doing a good job overall.”

Self-compassionate people believe that they are good, well-meaning, and competent. When they make a mistake at work, it’s just that—a single mistake. People who are not self-compassionate often assume the worst about themselves. A mistake at work is viewed as something much bigger, such as a personal failing.

When you’re critical and judgmental of yourself, you’re more likely to experience unhappiness, insecurity, and anxiety. When you treat yourself fairly, you are better able to manage these uncomfortable feelings.

Many of us have ideas about who we "should” be. A man might believe he has to be strong, brave, and outgoing. A mother might believe she always has to put her needs last. For many, not matching these ideals feels like a flaw.

In reality, humans aren’t so simple. While some men are strong, brave, and outgoing, others are shy, emotional, and cautious. While some mothers do put their needs last, others value their career as much as their family life. It sounds like a cliché, but everyone is different... and that’s okay.

People who are self-compassionate accept themselves for who they are, rather than who they “should” be. Not only that, but they often take pride in their unique characteristics. For example, a self-compassionate man who is emotional might view himself as being deeply connected to others, rather than having a weakness.

Self-acceptance does not mean loving every little thing about yourself, or believing you are perfect. It means accepting yourself for who you are, rather than who you are not.

Even when life gets busy, it’s important to look out for your own health and happiness, and take care of your needs. This means eating regular meals, getting enough sleep, taking time for fun and relaxation, or whatever it is you need.

Taking care of yourself is not the same as spoiling or overindulging. For example, taking a break to eat a healthy meal is not the same as eating whatever you want, whenever you want.

This might be easier to understand when you think about caring for someone else. If you’re caring for a young child, you don’t ignore them when they're hungry. But that doesn’t mean you give them an ice cream sundae for breakfast. You think about what’s best for them, and take care of their needs accordingly.

Caring for yourself requires a balance between immediate needs and long-term goals. For example, if you’ve been studying for hours, it’s reasonable to take a break. However, if you want to pass an exam, you do need to study at some point.

Sometimes long-term goals will require discomfort, such as studying or exercising when you’d rather relax on the couch. There’s no simple answer for how much discomfort or sacrifice a person should make—it depends on the individual and their goals. But it’s important to have an awareness of your own needs, and a balance that works for you.

You have a front-row seat to your own imperfections and mistakes. While others can hide their insecurities, you can’t hide from yourself. When you feel bad about yourself, or when you make a mistake, it might seem like you’re the only one.

Remember that no one is perfect. Being imperfect is part of being human. Everyone has bad days, loses their temper, and makes mistakes. Sometimes, those mistakes are really big.

Whatever your struggle, try to put it in perspective. Know that it’s normal to have flaws and make mistakes, even if you don’t always see them in others.

Recognizing that your struggles are normal gives you permission to feel self-compassion, despite any shortcomings.

Mindfulness means taking a step back from your thoughts and emotions, and seeing them objectively. This is how you see others’ thoughts and feelings: logically and from a distance. Creating distance from your own thoughts and feelings lessens the power they have over you.

In addition to creating distance, mindfulness will help you become accepting of your feelings. It’s common to think “I shouldn’t be sad” or “I shouldn’t be angry.” Mindfulness lets you acknowledge your feelings, without the need to change them. “I shouldn’t be angry” becomes “I am angry, and that is okay.”

Mindfulness builds self-compassion by creating perspective and acceptance of your thoughts and feelings. This lets you take control of your life, rather than being at the whim of your emotions. Additionally, mindfulness will help you practice other self-compassion habits, like recognizing when you are being judgmental toward yourself, ignoring your needs, or failing to see your struggles as normal.

Learning to view your experiences mindfully makes everything else easier. When you take a step back, you can see things more clearly.

Unsurprisingly, practicing self-compassion is easier said than done. Many people focus on their flaws and feel that they are not worthy of kindness. Others set unrealistic goals, demanding nothing less than perfection.

After a lifetime of self-judgment, the habit is difficult to break. It becomes reflexive. But with practice, these reflexes can be unlearned, and replaced with self-compassion.


--- SOURCE: https://www.therapistaid.com/therapy-article/cbt-why-thoughts-matter ---

Have you ever watched a movie that really made you feel something? Maybe you’ve felt fear while the camera creeps down a dark hallway, anger when the villain gets his way, or joy when everything turns out okay. It seems obvious that movies can make us feel... but why? We aren’t creeping down a dark hallway, and the victory at the end isn’t our own.

The answer is actually very simple. Being in a dark hallway does not cause fear. It’s what you think about being in a dark hallway that causes fear. In short: Your thoughts have the power to control your emotions.

This is where cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) comes in. During CBT, you will learn to identify thinking patterns in your everyday life that are causing painful emotions or other problems. Then, by developing new thoughts, you will learn to change how you feel.

In this article, we'll dive deeper into thoughts, and the role they play in controlling emotions.

It seems intuitive that how you feel is a result of the situations you face. If something “good” happens, you feel happy, excited, or proud. If something “bad” happens, you feel angry, sad, or worried.

For example, imagine you are driving on the highway, and another vehicle cuts you off. As a result, you feel angry. It seems to make sense that you are angry because you were cut off.

However, if situations truly caused emotions, every person would react to the same situation in the same way. Of course, this is not the case. Some people become angry after being cut off in traffic, while others brush it off.

The answer is that situations do not actually cause emotions. There’s a step in between that often goes unnoticed. It’s how you interpret or think about a situation that determines how you feel.

Imagine two different people are cut off by hurried drivers, but they both have different thoughts about the situation:

So, how does all of this happen without you even noticing it? The answer is something called automatic thoughts.

Much of the time, thoughts are overlooked because they happen outside of your awareness. When you have the same thoughts over and over, your brain begins to tune them out. These are called automatic thoughts. Automatic thoughts are like a sound you can hear, but don’t usually notice, such as the hum of a refrigerator.

To see automatic thoughts in action, think of something you do so frequently that it feels like second nature. For example, when you commute to work or school for the first time, you might need directions. But before long, it will seem as if you are travelling on autopilot. You don’t look up directions or think about each turn—you just do it.

The brain’s ability to run on “autopilot” is important, because it frees up resources for other tasks. But there’s a downside, too. When thoughts happen automatically, outside of your awareness, they aren’t assessed for accuracy. Thoughts with inadequate evidence may be accepted as fact.

Another trick the brain uses to make sense of the world is guessing. Imagine you text a friend, and they don’t answer for several hours. You don’t know why they haven’t responded, but your brain will probably try to guess. Your brain could guess something mundane, like: “They must be busy at work.” Or it might guess something more extreme, like: “They must be angry at me.”

Sometimes these guesses are accurate, but not always. When guesses lack evidence, they are called irrational thoughts.

Over time, even irrational thoughts can become automatic. This means thoughts and beliefs that are not true can shape how you feel, and how you behave, without you knowing.

Imagine a person who develops the automatic thought: “People do not like me.” This belief begins to color every situation. When a friend doesn’t return a text message, it feels hurtful. When a stranger scowls at them in the grocery store, it feels personal. Even when they receive a compliment, it feels phony or insincere.

Of course, these interpretations of each situation aren’t accurate. They’re shaped by irrational thoughts that are happening automatically, outside of awareness.

One goal of CBT is to identify and challenge irrational thoughts. After challenging an irrational thought, you will learn to replace it with a new, rational thought. Doing this will improve how you feel and how you act.

By replacing irrational thoughts with rational alternatives, your feelings will better match the situation. Generally, this leads to healthier behaviors that result in better outcomes during everyday situations.

The importance of thoughts, and how they interact with feelings, is at the foundation of CBT. Going forward, you will learn to notice your thoughts as they’re happening, evaluate them, and change thoughts that are irrational.


--- SOURCE: https://www.therapistaid.com/therapy-article/grounding-techniques-article ---

After a trauma, it’s normal to experience flashbacks, anxiety, and other uncomfortable symptoms. Grounding techniques help control these symptoms by turning attention away from thoughts, memories, or worries, and refocusing on the present moment. In this article, you will learn four powerful grounding techniques for managing the symptoms of trauma.

For a printable or audio version of grounding techniques, see the following resources:

Using the 5-4-3-2-1 technique, you will purposefully take in the details of your surroundings using each of your senses. Strive to notice small details that your mind would usually tune out, such as distant sounds, or the texture of an ordinary object.

Choose at least three of the categories below and name as many items as you can in each one. Spend a few minutes on each category to come up with as many items as possible.

For a variation on this activity, try naming items in a category alphabetically. For example, for the fruits & vegetables category, say “apple, banana, carrot,” and so on.

The body awareness technique will bring you into the here-and-now by directing your focus to sensations in the body. Pay special attention to the physical sensations created by each step.

Use mental exercises to take your mind off uncomfortable thoughts and feelings. They are discreet and easy to use at nearly any time or place. Experiment to see which work best for you.


--- SOURCE: https://www.therapistaid.com/therapy-article/fair-fighting-rules-article ---

Every relationship has disagreements. It’s how we handle those disagreements that counts. A bad argument can turn even a little problem into a big one, making it emotionally charged and painful.

This is where fair fighting rules come in. Fair fighting rules don’t tell us we can’t argue. Instead, they tell us how to do it safely. They tell us what’s okay—and what’s crossing the line—in an argument.

Are you angry because your partner left the mustard on the counter? Or are you angry because you feel like you’re doing an uneven share of the housework, and this is just one more piece of evidence? Take time to think about your own feelings before starting an argument.

Don’t let “You left dishes in the sink” turn into “You watch too much TV.” Discussions that get off-topic are more likely to get heated, and less likely to solve the original problem. Choose one topic and stick to it.

Discuss the issue, not the person. No put-downs, swearing, or name-calling. Degrading language is an attempt to express negative feelings while making sure your partner feels just as bad. Doing so leads to more character attacks while the original issue is forgotten.

“I feel hurt when you ignore my phone calls.” “I feel scared when you yell.” Structure your sentences as “I” statements (“I feel emotion when event”) to express how you feel while taking responsibility for your emotions. However, starting with “I” does not give a license to ignore the other fair fighting rules.

Give your full attention while your partner speaks. Avoid making corrections or thinking about what you want to say. Your only job is to understand their point of view, even if you disagree. If you find it difficult to not interrupt, try setting a timer allowing 1-2 minutes for each person to speak without interruption.

Sometimes, the easiest way to respond to an argument is to retreat into your shell and refuse to speak. This is called stonewalling. You might feel better temporarily, but the original issue will remain unresolved and your partner will feel more upset. If you absolutely cannot go on, tell your partner you need to take a time-out. Agree to resume the discussion later.

Yelling does not help anyone see your point of view. Instead, it sends the message that only your words matter. Even if yelling intimidates your partner into giving up, the underlying problem only grows worse.

In a perfect world, we would all follow these rules 100% of the time... but it just doesn’t work like that. If an argument starts to become personal or heated, take a time-out. Agree on a time to come back and discuss the problem after everyone has cooled down.

There isn’t always a perfect answer to an argument. Life is too messy for that. Do your best to come to a compromise (this means some give and take from both sides). If you can’t come to a compromise, simply taking the time to understand your partner’s perspective can help soothe negative feelings.


--- SOURCE: https://www.therapistaid.com/therapy-article/benefits-of-mindfulness ---

Mindfulness has been defined as "a moment-to-moment awareness of one's experience without judgment" (1). This means having conscious awareness of one's own thoughts, feelings, sensations, and behaviors, without evaluation, or the formation of an opinion.

You're acting mindfully when you listen to a song you love, and notice every tiny detail in the sound. Or maybe you've felt anxiety before a big event like a wedding or a job interview, you acknowledged that feeling, and chose to simply accept it.

The opposite of mindfulness would be those times when your body works on "autopilot". Maybe you've eaten a meal and realized you didn't taste a thing, just because you weren't paying attention. Or maybe you've said something cruel out of anger, without realizing that your emotions were driving your actions, until it was too late.

Over the past decade, mindfulness has emerged as a popular component to many types of psychotherapy such as Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT), Acceptance and Commitment Therapy (ACT), and Dialectical Behavior Therapy (DBT). But what does mindfulness actually do for us, and for our clients? Does it really help? We decided to dig through the research to find some answers.

In psychotherapy, mindfulness training is regularly used as a tool to treat depression, anxiety, and stress. The good news is that it works, and it works well. Multiple meta-analyses suggest that mindfulness reduces clients' anxiety, stress, and symptoms of mood disorder, and the positive effects are maintained long-term (2, 3). One study even found that mindfulness training was as effective as anti-depressants at preventing the relapse of depressive symptoms, 16 weeks after treatment (4).

Mindfulness-based treatments seem to work, but how? The most studied form of mindfulness training is called Mindfulness-Based Stress Reduction (MBSR). In MBSR, clients attend an 8-week course where they practice a variety of mindfulness exercises such as meditation, discuss their stressors, and complete regular homework which encourages further practice of mindfulness skills.

Other treatments, such as DBT, use mindfulness as a single part of a larger approach to therapy. In DBT mindfulness training is used to help clients learn to accept problems that they do not have control over, or cannot change.

In each of these interventions, various mindfulness exercises are used with the idea that practicing will lead to a higher level of trait mindfulness. Trait mindfulness refers to a person's frequent experience of mindfulness (as if it is a personality trait), as opposed to only experiencing mindfulness during the course of an exercise.

The verdict on increasing trait mindfulness seems to be positive. Some studies have found that those who regularly practice mindfulness develop changes in how their brain functions that contribute to emotional regulation, concentration, and cognitive processing speed (1). These changes may account for the long-term positive effects associated with mindfulness training.

Mindfulness may also help in the treatment of mental illness by facilitating the use of other coping skills. For example, a client dealing with anger will be more likely to use a relaxation skill if they are mindful of their emotions, and identify their anger early.

Some researchers are beginning to look at the benefits of mindfulness not only for clients, but also for therapists. Because this area has been studied less thoroughly, many questions are still unanswered, but what we do know is interesting.

Several traits of therapists that are associated with positive treatment outcomes are thought to be improved by mindfulness training. A few of these traits include empathy and compassion for clients, attentiveness during sessions, and increased comfort with silence (1). Therapists-in-training who were taught to use mindfulness meditation reported higher levels of self-awareness, improvements in their basic counseling skills, and overall wellness.

The effects of mindfulness on symptoms of mental illness, such as anxiety and mood symptoms, hold true for clinicians as well. Mindfulness training might result in better stress-management and reduced levels of burnout among therapists.

Unfortunately, treatment outcomes and their relationship with therapists' levels of mindfulness are still unclear. Initial studies indicate that there is no connection between a therapist's self-reported level of mindfulness and the treatment outcomes of their clients (1). However, when a therapist undergoes formal mindfulness training, their treatment outcomes tend to improve. This might just tell us that self-report is a poor measure of mindfulness, but further research will be required before making any assertions.

Mindfulness can clearly play a role in the treatment of mental illness, but how about its use in non-clinical issues? Individuals who practice mindfulness who are not suffering from mental illness still see psychological benefits such as an overall sense of wellbeing, improved concentration, and increased morality. Physical health benefits of mindfulness include improved immune functioning and improved cardiovascular health (1, 5).

Relationships also benefit when at least one of the individuals has a high level of trait mindfulness (1). A few of these benefits include less emotional stress and better communication. Trait mindfulness also acts as a predictor of overall relationship satisfaction.

After a review of the research, it's clear that mindfulness can play an important role in the treatment of several mental illnesses, and it can be used to improve the quality of life for normal-functioning individuals. If you would like to keep reading about mindfulness, and how it can be applied in treatment, I suggest picking up Jon Kabat-Zin's book, Wherever You Go, There You Are (linked below).


--- SOURCE: https://www.therapistaid.com/therapy-article/10-tips-for-avoiding-relapse ---

Achieving sobriety is tough, and so is maintaining it. We've put together ten tips to help you stay on track after you've decided to kick your addiction. That being said, these tips aren't a panacea, and one size doesn't fit all. Everyone should take the time to adapt these relapse prevention tips to their own situation. Check the end of the article for a printable version to keep near by and refer to in times of need, or to share with clients.

The most important moment before relapse isn't the final decision to use a drug. It's when you decide to expose yourself to triggers. For example, a trigger could be going to a party or walking through the liquor section at the store. Before encountering your triggers, you still have most of the control. Not your craving.

If you're feeling the urge to use, try to wait it out. If you distract yourself for even 30 minutes, it's likely your craving will lessen in intensity. It might not totally disappear, but it will be easier to resist.

Focus on replacing your past drug use with new positive activities. If you used to go home after work and drink, you'll need to make a new plan to occupy yourself. Going home and staring at a wall will eventually lead to staring at a wall with a drink in your hand.

Don't try to do this alone. Sharing your goals for sobriety with a friend makes all the difference. They can hold you accountable when you're making questionable decisions ("I'm just going to the bar to hang out, I won't drink!") and they can offer a kind ear when you're struggling.

Remind yourself that cravings will pass. Have you ever had that experience when you're sick where you can't remember what it feels like to not be sick? The same thing happens with cravings. Give it time, and believe it or not, the feeling will go away.

You'll have to make sacrifices beyond giving up the drug. If you previously used during specific activities (for example, watching a game on TV, going to concerts, or spending time with friends), you may need to make changes. This might mean not watching the game, or making new friends who are sober. This can be really hard, but that's what makes it a sacrifice.

Have a plan for when things get bad, because at some point, they will. People get fired, hearts get broken, and sometimes people leave us forever. Develop a plan to get through these major life challenges--without the use of drugs--before they happen.

Don't become complacent with your sobriety. If you someday consider having "just a glass of wine with dinner," don't make the decision lightly. If you've struggled with addiction in the past, you are much more likely to develop an addiction again.

If you do relapse, don't give up. A lot of people find it helpful to keep track of how long they've been sober, but don't confuse this count with the true goal of leading a happy and fulfilling life. If you're at day 100 of sobriety, that's great. However, if you make a mistake and end up back at day 0, know that you are not starting over (you have knowledge, experience, and confidence. In other words: Slipping up is not a license to go on a binge.

Create new rituals. How do you celebrate holidays, promotions, or any other happy occasion? If your answer includes any sort of drug, you'll want to get creative and figure out something new. Go wild with a hobby for the day, treat yourself to a nice dinner, or take a weekend trip. Make sure it's something you can get excited about.

If you found these tips helpful you can print them out to keep handy, or to share with clients. Check out the worksheet version in the link below:


--- SOURCE: https://www.therapistaid.com/therapy-article/trauma-treatment-planning-for-clinicians ---

A client recently spoke these words to me when referring to symptoms of posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD). The impact of PTSD on quality of life cannot be underestimated.

My former supervisor, Victor Carrion, MD, Director of the Stanford Early Life Stress Research Program, says PTSD is a disorder of fear extinction and it feeds on avoidance. I was his intern for two years, and later was hired to be one of two therapists in a 3 year clinical research trial of a cutting edge, short-term treatment for youth suffering posttraumatic symptoms.

We tested Stanford Cue Centered Treatment, a 15-18 session intervention with youth, ages 8-17, meeting with them in their schools. We had outstanding results, with participants having a 65% drop in posttraumatic symptoms very quickly, along with a 50+% decrease in depression and anxiety.

All of these symptoms sap a person's energy. It is bad enough that they either witnessed or experienced trauma, and now they are having a host of unpleasant symptoms.

As clinicians it is our job to bring immediate relief. As a Stanford-trained trauma therapist, we began immediately by doing a thorough intake and assessment. Dr. Carrion says that the greatest mistake clinicians make is not asking about trauma, or if they do, they do not ask in enough detail.

When we ask a client to tell us about the trauma in great detail, (i.e., "What did you see? Was there blood? How much and where was it? Could you see inside the bullet hole? What could you hear/smell?") we do two things. First, we demonstrate our faith in the client; s/he is strong enough to survive telling us about this trauma. Sometimes this may be the first time the trauma is being discussed. Second, by discussing the trauma, we begin to reactivate the body's fear extinction mechanism. Retelling the details of a trauma acts as a form of exposure.

As the client survives the memory of the trauma in a safe environment with a caring clinician, they begin the process of desensitization. By asking for all the details, we show the client we can handle it, even the really, terrible stuff they have never told anybody.

The bad news about PTSD is it does not go away over time if left untreated, and instead gets worse. The good news is it responds very well to treatment.

In my own private practice, when clients seek me out for trauma treatment, I focus first on educating the client about PTSD symptoms, and giving them tools for body mastery. In the first two sessions after the intake, we solely focus on tools that give them relief from posttraumatic symptoms.

Using Aureen Wagner's "Feelings Thermometer" with both adults and children, I coach clients to rate their feelings on a scale of 1-10 (1 = Life is a piece of cake, 10 = Out of control! Ballistic!). I explain the anatomy of the flight or flight reaction, and why long, slow deep breathing in which the exhale is twice as long as the inhale is essential to stop the reaction in its tracks. This type of breathing calms many people, in addition to stopping the ratcheting up of the body's fear reaction. However, some people still continue to feel anxious. Next, I teach progressive muscle relaxation, which helps almost everyone.

Finally, we do guided imagery. Usually, by the time all three are done, the person's "temperature" is back to a 1 or 2. This demonstration is powerful as they realize they can achieve body mastery over their anxiety and fight or flight reactions. I instruct them to practice all three every day in the coming week, and that we will discuss their progress, particularly how they handle traumatic cues. I remind them that anytime they notice their temperature is a 5, they should do something to bring it down.

During the nest session, I ask how they did with managing their symptoms throughout the week. Were they able to remember the tools? How high did their temperature get? Often both of us are delighted at the progress they have made towards achieving body mastery. We continue practicing, and add some cognitive tools such as thought insertion and reality testing for catastrophizing.

Once a person with PTSD learns body mastery so that they can calm their body on command, we are ready to explore the trauma narrative. Body mastery is essential to help them tolerate the anxiety of telling their story in full detail. The person I mentioned at the beginning of the article had a steep decline in post-traumatic symptoms within three sessions thanks to the techniques I have outlined.

After the intake, education and body mastery are the first big keys to curing PTSD. When we use the strategy outlined above, clients receive immediate relief from symptoms and they begin to develop hope--the greatest gift I can give.


--- SOURCE: https://www.therapistaid.com/therapy-article/how-to-practice-mindfulness-meditation-article ---

Jon Kabat-Zinn--a leader in the field of mindfulness and health--has defined mindfulness as "paying attention in a particular way: on purpose, in the present moment, and non-judgementally." This means consciously paying attention to our senses, and to our feelings, without further judgement. For example, mindfulness could be practised by focusing on the sensation of water rushing over your hands as it falls from a faucet, or by feeling and accepting sadness without trying to push it away or to evaluate it.

Research has linked mindfulness meditation with reduced anxiety, more positive emotions, and, with enough practice, permanent structural changes in the brain that sustain these benefits. Before beginning, know that meditation is a skill that requires practice. In the beginning it might seem as if unwanted thoughts constantly intrude your mind and the serenity associated with meditation might be brief. With time your ability to meditate, and to control your focus, will improve. Listed below are instructions to help you begin mindfulness meditation.

For the best results meditation should be a daily exercise. Meditating for 30 minutes a day might be a great goal, but it might not be realistic for your life. If 30 minutes doesn't seem doable, try to start with 10 to 15 minutes a day. Create a schedule that you can stick to, rather than one that you will give up on in a week.

How you sit isn't too important--just make sure you are comfortable, but not so relaxed that you will doze off. It will be OK to sit on the floor, in a chair, and with your legs either crossed or straight. Keep your spine upright and find a pose that you can maintain without too much discomfort.

Allow your thoughts to come and go. The more you try to control them, the more invasive they will become. Like our senses, thoughts are a normal part of our existence. Acknowledge your thoughts and let them pass naturally.

Focus on your breathing. Take full but gentle breaths through your nose and notice the rising and the falling of your belly. Notice how your body changes as air enters and then leaves your lungs. This is the key to mindfulness meditation. Focusing on the sensation of your breathing will quickly bring you into the present and connect your mind with your body.

Plan to devote 10 to 15 minutes to meditation each day, and more if you think you can. Find a relaxing posture and begin to focus on your breathing. Pay attention to each breath and the sensations in your body. Allow thoughts to enter your mind and then fade away without judgement or resistance. After they have passed return your focus to breathing. Continue this process for the duration of meditation.


--- SOURCE: url ---
[Music] have you ever not done something that you really wanted to do because he felt nervous or anxious about it like maybe going skydiving or traveling around the world to a country whose language you don't speak or maybe something more day-to-day like asking someone on a date they're just stepping out of your comfort zone and doing something that you wouldn't usually do when you don't do these things when you don't face your fears anxiety has a tendency to grow and this is explained by something called

the cycle of anxiety or the cycle of avoidance you the first step in the cycle is anxiety this step begins when you're first confronted with that thing that makes you feel nervous are afraid or anxious when you're confronted with this you start to develop these uncomfortable symptoms these are the symptoms of anxiety things like erasing heart butterflies in your stomach sweating or trembling you're just thoughts of being overwhelmed or afraid when you start to feel these symptoms the key point is

that you really want to get away from them because they're so uncomfortable you just want those symptoms to disappear you the second step in a cycle of anxiety is avoidance when those symptoms of anxiety get to be too much too uncomfortable it becomes really tempting to find a way to get rid of them and the easiest way to do that is to just avoid whatever is causing them physical avoidance is one way to do this and that's just to remove yourself from that situation so for example someone who doesn't want to give

a presentation at work or school they might skip class or call and sick to work so they don't have to do it another form of avoidance is emotional avoidance this is when someone faces that fear but they find a way to suppress that anxiety or the emotions that go with it a good example of this is someone at a party who's shy doesn't really want to talk to people because they're nervous so they drink until that anxiety goes away that way they can avoid the uncomfortable emotions now avoidance isn't always bad

most of us have a healthy level of fear about things like snakes we might not go stomping around in tall grass because you don't want to get bitten and in those cases avoidance can actually be a good the third step in the cycle is short-term relief from anxiety what this means is a person's made that decision to not face their fear and it works they get that relief those symptoms they go away you make the decision to skip your presentation you can just stay at home lie on the couch watch TV and it feels

really good the problem is that relief it's short-lived and it has costs that come with it if you skip work someone else is going to get that promotional read just give school you're gonna get worse grades if you don't ask someone on a date you might miss a great opportunity you this brings us to the fourth and final step in the cycle which is long term anxiety growth what this means is you've avoided that thing that caused an anxiety the symptoms went away and the anxiety lessened but then in the long

term the anxiety actually grows this is because when you avoid something the bring learns a simple lesson he learns when I skip school I feel good when I skip work I feel good when I don't face my fears I feel good every time you do that it becomes more and more ingrained you become more likely to avoid something in the future you to break out of the cycle of anxiety all you have to do is face your fears of course this is easier said than done but every time that you face them it becomes a little bit easier your brain learns

the opposite lesson it learns I faced my fear and it was okay now how a mental health professional can help you with this by gradually exposing you to those fears in a safe way starting with something smaller and working your way up if you practice this enough you can overcome your anxiety [Music]

--- SOURCE: url ---
You're crossing the street when you hear the loud  screech of car tires behind you. In the space of just milliseconds, your heart rate spikes, your  adrenaline surges, and you whip around to see if the car is coming toward you. Amazingly, this  happens entirely outside of your awareness. Your body responds before you have time to think. And  this is for a really good reason. The extra second it would take to ask yourself, "What should I do?"  could be the difference between life and death.

This is the stress response, also known as  fight, flight, freeze. These are the three ways we instinctively respond when our brains  sense danger. In this video, I'll teach you more about this response, why it's relevant  to everyday life, and how you can control it. [intro music] Okay, so you've turned around to see the car and  you see the screech was just a car doing donuts in a parking lot. You weren't actually in danger. But  imagine if the car had been right behind you. The

stress response could have saved your life. Well,  despite there being no real danger, you're still left with the after effects of stress. It can take  30 minutes or more for your body to finally settle back down. To illustrate what this looks like,  take a look at this graph. When you first hear the screeching tires, your body immediately kicks into  high gear. When you turn around and see there's no danger, your body begins to calm down, but that  process takes a long time. We inherited fight,

flight, freeze from our ancestors who needed it to  survive attacks from predators and lots of other physical dangers. It was better for the alarm to  be too sensitive rather than overlook even one real threat because it only takes a single tiger  to ruin your life. In modern times, the stress response is like an annoyingly sensitive smoke  alarm. It might save your life if there's a fire, but it also goes off every time someone lights a  candle. Another frustration is that fight, flight, freeze is better suited to physical threats. Many  modern sources of stress, like taking a test or

getting into an argument, just don't benefit from  pumping adrenaline and a thumping heartbeat. So, how do the automatic reactions of fight,  flight, freeze play out in the sort of day-to-day situations that we actually face?  Well, fight. Instead of attacking a predator, you might get ready to fight another person.  But more often, you get into an argument or become defensive. Or say someone cuts you off  in traffic, you might speed after them, honk, or tailgate. Flight. Instead of physically running  away, you're more likely to avoid going somewhere

or doing something that makes you feel nervous.  For example, if you're afraid of flying on an airplane, you might avoid traveling even if you  really want to. Or you might avoid your anxious feelings, maybe by using drugs or alcohol. A  common example is drinking at a party to get over nerves and to become more social. Freeze.  Instead of playing dead, as you might have done with a predator, you mentally check out of  a situation or you shut down. For example, you sit down to take an exam. Your mind goes  blank. You can't remember anything you studied.

As you can see, fight, flight, freeze pops up in  many different situations, but it isn't always so straightforward. Something as simple as an  argument could trigger any of these responses or a combination of them. So, imagine you're  talking with a friend and a touchy subject comes up. Your friend starts to raise their voice and  you feel your stress response start up like that. Just like when you heard the screeching tires of a  car, your heart rate elevates and you feel a rush of adrenaline. Here's what happens. Fight. Your  jaw clenches. Your face turns red and you start to

raise your own voice and argue right back. Flight.  You feel your heart fluttering. You get nervous. Your hands might be a little shaky. You try to  change the subject or you make an excuse to leave and freeze. Your mind just goes blank. You feel  checked out and you shut down. You stop responding until your friend gets it all out and moves on  to a new topic. All right. So, what happens after that initial spike of anxiety? Well, now it's up  to you. After that initial automatic reaction, you have a moment where you can stop and ask  yourself what you'd like to do next. Often times

we miss that window and our bodies go into a sort  of autopilot. If you're in an argument, you just keep arguing and arguing. If you're anxious at a  party, you head for the door and you go back home. But here's the thing. After that initial spike  of anxiety that's out of our control, you don't have to continue fueling that reactivity. You can  pause, think, and take back control. If you're in an argument, you can stop to ask yourself if it's  really worth it. If you're anxious at a party,

you can choose to face your fear and stick it out.  I call this the "power of the pause." This is your chance to stop and reflect on the situation.  It seems like a small thing, but it's actually really powerful. Think about what happens after  the pause. You can stop arguing, lower your voice, and work on repairing the relationship instead  of further harming it. You can stay at the party. Maybe you meet some new people who change your  life. You can face your fear of flying and take

a vacation you've always dreamed of. The stress  response is a really important way that your body protects itself from danger, but sometimes it  overreacts. You can learn to notice when this is happening so you can intervene and you can  make the choices that are actually best for you.


--- SOURCE: url ---
The Four Horsemen are four unhelpful behaviors that escalate conflict and damage relationships. Antidotes are the strategies that counteract each of the four horsemen. In this video I'll be discussing one of the four horsemen criticism and its antidote the gentle startup. [intro music] In a relationship, criticism is different than a complaint or a critique. Criticism is more about putting the other person down personally rather than focusing on the external problem. It often involves things like name calling, insults, and exaggerations, using words like always and never.

Picture a couple having a disagreement about cleaning the kitchen. A critique might sound like "I'm frustrated about cleaning the kitchen by myself every evening." It's about the problem, the kitchen, the cleaning. Alternatively a criticism might sound like "You never help with the kitchen. You're such a slob." There the focus is more about the person. As you can probably imagine, criticism often results in a person feeling rejected or hurt which leads to them becoming defensive.

and closed off. So instead of working as a team to solve the problem, couples who use criticism get stuck just throwing blame back and forth. A gentle startup is a way of addressing a problem in a calm productive way without using criticism. It works by waiting until the right time to bring up a problem, using gentle body language, taking responsibility for your feelings, and making a positive request. Let's break it down. Step one, wait for the right time. Timing is crucial. When you wait for a moment when you and your partner are both calm and ready to talk, things are

usually going to go a lot better. Avoid starting a conversation when things are hectic or when you or your partner is preoccupied. For example, if your partner is walking in the door after a long day at work, even a kind request to help with chores might not be well received. Another quick tip, avoid serious conversations when either person is tired, hungry, or stressed. It sounds basic but it really does make a big difference. Step two, use gentle body language. A gentle startup is more than what you say, it's also how you say it. The same words will get very different reactions

if they're said with crossed arms, raised voice, and a scowl, compared to openness and gentleness. The best way to keep positive body language is from the inside out. Enter a conversation with a genuine mindset of problem solving rather than blaming. When approached in this way your partner will be more likely to listen and share that same helpful mindset. Step three, take responsibility for your feelings. It can be tempting to hurl blame, especially when you're frustrated, but it doesn't

do any good. Use an "I" statement to help you take responsibility for your feelings while bringing up a problem. Try the phrase "I feel _____ when _____." First, you clearly state how the problem makes you feel. It always has to be an emotion word like "angry," "hurt," or "worried." It's okay to have and express difficult emotions, but it's really important that you take responsibility for them rather than blaming your partner. Next, you explain the specific situation that led to

that emotion. And this needs to be external, not personal. In practice, it might sound like "I feel frustrated when I clean the kitchen by myself." Finally, step four make a positive request. After stating the problem it's time to share your desired solution. It's important to say what you want as opposed to what you don't want. For example, instead of saying "Stop being lazy!" try "Would you please help with the dishes tonight?" Positive requests are more likely to lead to

effective problem solving. As you can see, when it comes to addressing a problem a gentle startup is far more effective than criticism. Gentle startups help resolve conflict, they encourage positive feelings, and they help improve communication between partners. It does take some practice to get in the habit of communicating in this new more gentle way. Just keep being mindful of your words, your tone of voice, your timing, and don't give up if it doesn't work the first time you try. [outro music]


--- SOURCE: url ---
No matter where you go or what you do, you're always in your own company. Think about it. The person you spend the most time with, by far, is you. And despite this, we're often really hard on ourselves. We dwell on a little something we said  wrong, and we refuse to forgive our mistakes. We hold ourselves to standards we'd never expect from anyone else. In contrast, we tend to treat the people we care about really well. We're quick to offer them kindness and forgiveness. We just

want them to be happy. Well, what would happen if we treated ourselves just as well as we treat others? What would life be like if we tried treating ourselves with compassion? [intro music] Self-compassion means, very simply, treating yourself with empathy and forgiveness. People who are self-compassionate know they aren't perfect, but they're kind to themselves anyway. They still feel bad about making mistakes, but they don't beat themselves up about it. The messages they tell themselves are kinder. People who are self-compassionate see themselves

as a normal person with both strengths  and weaknesses. Without self-compassion, you rely on other people for your sense of worth. But when you have self-compassion, you create your own sense of worth. And this is so important.  This is what lets you stop being a people pleaser. It lets you live in a way that you believe  is right and in a way that makes you happy. This glow of self-compassion is so powerful  that it spills over into every aspect of life. Self-compassion makes it easier to try new  things because you know failing isn't the end of

the world. You aren't going to beat yourself up.  You can be more confident in relationships because you're being true to yourself. You can live the  life you want because you're less concerned about what other people think. And you can just be  happier because criticism feels less important. Fortunately, there are some things you can do to  become more self-compassionate. Let's talk about a few techniques. First, treat yourself like  a good friend. That basic humanity you show everyone else, well, you deserve it too. You  just have to work on turning it inward. Think

about something you've been beating yourself  up about. Maybe it was a bad grade on a test or something you said that you wish you could take  back. Notice the messages you're telling yourself, like, "I mess everything up," "I'm not good  enough," or "I'm worthless." Now, imagine you're with your best friend who's in the exact same  situation. Would you really look them in the eye and tell them those messages that you've been  telling yourself? Would you say to your friend,

"You mess everything up," "You're not good enough,"  You're worthless"? Imagine how it would feel to be on either side of that exchange. And yet,  we say these things to ourselves. So, what would you actually say to your friend? If you're  like most people, probably something like, "Hey, you made a mistake. It's okay." Or, "That was a  fluke. You'll do better next time." Or, "That's too bad, but it's going to work out." Think  about what you'd really say. Then say those same

phrases to yourself. If you've never practiced  self-compassion before, it can be hard to believe the things you're telling yourself. It might feel  forced or awkward, but if you keep at it, it'll get easier. The next technique is striving for a  balanced perspective. People who don't practice self-compassion tend to focus on negative thoughts  about themselves. Instead of seeing yourself as all bad, just take a step back and try to make a  fair assessment. When you do this, you might

find that some of your self-criticisms are a bit  overblown. To balance your perspective, try this. First, notice when you're having an unfair,  negative thought about yourself. You can usually spot these when you're speaking in absolutes.  For example, you might catch yourself saying, "I fail at everything." Next, ask yourself if this  is really true. Do you really fail at everything? Or are there some things that you succeed at? All  you need to do is think of one example from your

life to prove the thought isn't true. Finally,  go back to that original thought and make it more balanced. "I fail at everything" becomes  "this was hard for me, but like anyone I have strengths and weaknesses." Remember that no one is  perfect, but everyone deserves compassion. And a balanced perspective acknowledges this. In the  end, self-compassion boils down to one question. Who would you rather hang out with? Someone who  tears you down after every misstep or mistake,

or someone who forgives you and lifts you up?  One of the best things about self-compassion is that it's always available to you. You can treat  yourself with compassion every day of your life. [outro music]

--- SOURCE: url ---
Loss is an unavoidable part of life and when loss happens, grief is never very far behind. Even though grief can't be rushed, it has to go at its own pace, there are ways that you can work with it. Carrying out your own grief ritual is one very effective option. In this video, you'll learn about grief rituals  and how you can create your own. [intro music] Let me start with an example, a woman who lost her sister several years ago continues to grieve. Her sister loved hiking, nature, and most of all birds. Every month the woman finds a feather and sets out

for a long hike in the forest near her home. At the end of the hike is a stream, where she places the feather gently into the water and says goodbye as she watches it drift away. She takes a moment to reflect and to grieve before finally returning home. This is her personal grief ritual. You already know what a ritual is. Examples are meditating or praying in the morning, singing happy birthday at a party, or attending a wedding. Any event or activity with structure, intention, and an element of the sacred can be a ritual. When it comes to grief, attending a funeral or a celebration of

someone's life is a common ritual. Public events of this sort can be very meaningful and helpful in the grieving process but they usually only happen once. That's where a personal grief ritual comes in. This is an activity that you design based on your own loss, your beliefs, and your setting. For example, this might be planting flowers to mark the anniversary of someone's death or visiting a site that was special to that person. A grief ritual can help you accept your loss, process

emotions, establish a meaningful routine, and move toward healing. It can also connect you to whatever you consider sacred, such as a higher power or your most authentic self. Another benefit is the ability to repeat the activity as often as you like. So how do you create your own grief ritual. There are some simple steps that can guide you through this process. First, choose a meaningful object to use in your ritual. This should be something connected to your loss. If you're grieving the loss of a person, this could be something they wore, a letter they wrote, something from nature,

a photograph, their favorite food, whatever it is you can find that feels right to you. The next step in creating your grief ritual is to make it sacred. This involves choosing an activity that is both meaningful and distinct from your normal routine. For example, plan to light a candle, visit a beautiful place, or recite a cherished prayer or mantra. The goal is to choose an activity that inspires reflection and honors your loss. Next, find a way to incorporate movement. Research shows that connecting with your body helps with expressing and processing difficult emotions. Including

movement in your ritual also helps make it into a journey with a clear beginning and a clear end. This could be a walk around your neighborhood, a gentle yoga routine, or visiting a beloved place. Again, choose something that resonates with you and is appropriate to your situation. The next step is to interact with your chosen object. You might read a letter written by the person, release a feather on a stream as a way of saying goodbye, or plant seeds to express a hope for growth and for healing. You should choose an interaction that feels right to you. These interactions can help you

feel closer to the person you lost, build a sense of closure, or access your feelings in a way that helps you work with them. Don't rush through this step. Take a few moments to sit with the feelings that come up. The final step is to create closure and to repeat. Decide on a way to mark the end of your ritual. You could express a hope, say a prayer, or observe a moment of silence. Repeating a ritual will increase its benefits and open you to healing, growth, and insight. Come up with a plan

for carrying out your ritual on a regular basis. This might be once a year to mark the anniversary of your loss or it could be much more frequently, such as monthly or weekly. This will depend on the complexity of your ritual and what feels right to you. Let's look back at our example once more and put the pieces together with these steps. Given her sister's love of birds, the woman selects a colorful feather as her ritual object. The time of her ritual is made sacred by walking in nature

which her sister loved and by reflecting  on thoughts and feelings about her sister. She incorporates movement by walking through the forest to the stream. She interacts with the object, the feather, by releasing it into the stream. And finally, she marks the end of her ritual by saying goodbye. She repeats the hike every month. Hopefully this example gave you a better understanding of what a grief ritual involves. Your ritual will be unique to your loss, beliefs, and preferences. You can be creative as you decide how to incorporate the elements mentioned in this video.

[outro music]

--- SOURCE: url ---
Personal boundaries are part of every single interaction you have with other people. Simply put, boundaries are the rules and expectations in each of your relationships. They're how you know to act differently with a teacher or  your boss than you would with a best friend. Boundaries are also the reason you know not to do something like giving your bank account number to a stranger or sharing your life story with a clerk at the grocery store. On the other hand, they also let you know when you can be  open, when you can trust another person.

When someone has healthy boundaries  they balance these two sides. They know when to be open and when to be closed. In this video I'll teach you how to identify if your boundaries tend to be more open more closed and also how you can improve them. [intro music] First, let's talk about what makes boundaries unhealthy. I think it helps to imagine boundaries as a spectrum with too open on one end and too closed on the other. We call boundaries that are too open porous. A person with porous boundaries often has trouble saying "no." They might be afraid

of being rejected if they don't please. So they give in to the demands of others. They worry more about the needs and wants of other people at the expense of themselves. Boundaries that are too closed are called rigid. A person  with rigid boundaries avoids intimacy and close relationships. They have a hard time asking for help and they're overprotective of personal information. They might avoid talking about things like their problems or their feelings. People with rigid boundaries keep others at a distance to avoid even the possibility of rejection.

Finally, healthy boundaries make up the middle of the spectrum. This is a balance between porous and rigid boundaries. Someone with healthy boundaries is able to be open but they're also able to say "no" and stand up for themselves. A person with healthy boundaries respects their own needs while taking into account the needs and the wants of other people. Of course, nothing is ever quite that simple. In practice, boundaries are more than just porous, rigid, or healthy. You probably have a mix of

these traits in different situations, even if you tend to lean one way or another. For example, you might have a friend where you're really open with your time and you love to hang out any chance you get, but maybe what you like about the friendship is how much fun you have together and you prefer not to talk about personal problems. In this one relationship you have a mix of open and closed boundaries. Context will also affect what's even considered to be open or closed. Behaviors that

feel just write in a job interview will probably come across as closed off if you're out with a group of friends. It's normal and healthy to have these varied boundaries in different areas of your life. So why do different people have different boundaries? Why are some people really open, while others are more closed off or guarded? Most broadly, boundaries come from your culture. It's likely that the people who live near you, even strangers, share a lot of the same ideas about what behaviors are

normal and acceptable. For example, in most of the United States it's okay to talk about yourself and your personal achievements. It's even a sign of pride and confidence. But in some cultures, talking about your achievements, even a little bit, comes across as bragging and impolite. Every culture has expectations about how people should act in different situations and these expectations shape boundaries. Next, you have smaller social groups groups, like your family and friends, each with

their own set of boundaries. Are your friends polite or casual? Do they hug or shake hands? Do you share everything with your family or do you like to keep some things more private? Finally, there's you, the individual. Your own boundaries are influenced by your personal values. Values are the things you see as most important in life. These can be things like family or your career. They can also be traits like curiosity, honesty, or kindness. Ideally your boundaries will reflect your values. If you value your family very highly, you might create strict boundaries at

work and never work late. If you value kindness, you might be more open when it comes to helping others even strangers. So what are healthy boundaries. Healthy boundaries are like a drawbridge. They can be opened and closed to fit your needs. When closed, boundaries protect you from risk. When open, they let in the positive opportunities that life has to offer. The right balance of open and closed is a bit different for everyone. Healthy boundaries take your culture, social group, and your personal values into consideration. They balance protecting you from harm with letting

you just live and be open to experiences. People with healthy boundaries tend to be assertive. They can stand up for themselves, but they do so without trampling on others. They can say "yes," but they can also say "no" when they want to. So, if you're starting to notice boundaries for the first time one of the best things you can do is just pay attention. Notice where your boundaries are helping you or where they're hurting you and holding you back. Once you put a name to

your boundaries and begin seeing patterns, you can take a step back and start to make change. [outro music]

--- SOURCE: url ---
a lot of people have this problem where their anger seems to come from nowhere they feel fine one minute and the next they say or do something that they'll regret for other people this problem is even worse it feels like they go from zero to 100 in an instant they go ballistic but the reality is anger doesn't come from nowhere anger starts small and it grows gradually but when anger is small it tends to be hard to notice here's the good news even if you don't consciously notice your anger

starting to grow your body still reacts you might start to sweat a little bit your face might turn red you might raise your voice a few decibels without even realizing it we call these reactions anger warning signs with a little bit of practice you can learn to use these warning signs to your advantage to stop anger and its tracks let me tell you how I like to think of anger warning signs in three categories actions physical symptoms and thoughts action warning signs are anything that you do differently as your anger is starting to

grow for example you might become argumentative or raise your voice or maybe just the opposite maybe you lower your voice look at your feet as if you're trying to avoid confrontation physical symptoms are changes that happen to your body outside of your control for example sweating shaking turning red feeling hot or shallow breathing finally thoughts these warning signs include changes to the way that you think as your anger is starting to grow for example you might become really fixated on the source of your anger or maybe

particular thoughts go through your head like I've been disrespected or this is unfair now everyone has their own personal warning signs you might relate with something that I've just described or you might experience something that's completely unique and personal to you one of the best ways to learn about your own anger warning signs is with an anger thermometer you can do this on a worksheet or a blank sheet of paper to begin write the number 10 at the top of the paper a number down to one leaving a

few blank lines after each number next imagine your anger on a ten-point scale a 10 is angriest you've ever been while a one is completely calm think of the time when your anger was at a 10 what we're angry warning signs in that moment maybe you became argumentative physically aggressive and maybe your body shook with rage whatever it was write it down try to think of all three categories actions physical symptoms and thoughts now go down to the bottom what are you like at a 1 on the scale

maybe you're friendly relaxed or agreeable whatever it is write it down next go to the middle of 5 on the scale at this point you aren't calm but you're still a pretty long ways from a 10 write down the anger warning signs that you have at this point and finally let's try to fill in a few blanks along the scale for example maybe you know when you're just starting to get frustrated you sort of tap your foot maybe at a 3 write that down along with any other warning signs that you can think of now all of these items

these are your anger warning signs the items at the bottom of your thermometer they're especially valuable because they're gonna give you the most advanced warning that your anger is starting to develop once you've learned to catch your anger early it becomes much easier to control you can come as situations rationally rather than emotionally that means you can put yourself on warning use your relaxation skill or just walk away if that's what it takes now catching your anger warning signs in the

moment won't be easy at first it takes practice so to start you should review your anger thermometer every day just to keep those warning signs fresh in your mind and if you do have a slip-up where you have an angry episode that you don't catch in time that's okay but use it as a learning opportunity the next day take a look back and ask yourself what clues did I miss now with practice you will learn to catch your anger early and this is gonna put the power back in your hands [Music]


--- SOURCE: url ---
[Music] When I was in school, I hated giving  presentations. They were just the worst type of assignment in my opinion. I'd stumble over  my words, forget what I wanted to say, and  they just always felt like they went really poorly, but then I'd get pretty good grades and I didn't ever understand how that  was happening. How would I feel like I did so poorly but then I'd get good grades? Well, eventually I learned this is caused by something called Cognitive Distortions. A cognitive distortion is a type of irrational

thought where you see things as a bit more  negative than they really are. Now cognitive distortions are completely normal everyone  has them. It's just part of being human but when they're too frequent or too intense they  can contribute to problems like depression and anxiety. So today I want to tell you about  five different types of cognitive distortions. The first cognitive distortion is called Emotional Reasoning. This is when you feel something so intensely that you start to think it must  be true. For example, think of someone who

has a fear of flying. They know the fact that flying is safer than driving, but when they take that first step onto a plane that  fear takes over and they start to think "Oh I know this plane is gonna crash, I know it's  gonna crash." Of course, the feeling doesn't have any bearing on the facts, but if you feel it strongly enough it'll start to seem true. The next cognitive distortion is called  Disqualifying the Positive. This is when you look at a situation with both good and bad aspects and you sort of push that good stuff aside

and you just focus on the bad stuff. So imagine you get a performance review at work it says great job, great job, great job, needs improvement, great  job. You look at that and all you see is needs improvement you forget about all the positive feedback. Another good example, imagine you go on a first date everything is going well. You're getting along, you have a lot in common and then you say something really stupid. you just  put your foot in your mouth, and you wish you could unsay it. Well, when you get home that night that's all you can focus on a stupid

thing that you said and you sort of forget that  you're getting along great and having fun. That's Disqualifying the Positive, when you only focus  on a small negative aspect of some situation. The next cognitive distortion is called  Mind-Reading this is when you make assumptions about other people's thoughts or their intentions  or behaviors without really having enough evidence. So imagine you give a friend a call, they don't  answer and you start thinking "oh I bet they picked

up the phone saw what was me put it back down" or  "I bet they're hanging out with someone else they like more or maybe they just don't like me" and  that's mind-reading when you make assumptions about why someone does something or what they're  thinking or feeling without really knowing. the next cognitive distortion is called  All-or-Nothing Thinking. This is when you see things and extremes nothing in between.  There either black or they're white. They're

good or they're bad. On a more personal level,  this might mean I'm beautiful or I'm hideous. I'm brilliant or I'm a moron. I've got a great job  or I've got a terrible job. So for example, think of someone who seems to have a pretty good life.  They've got a a good job, close friends, hobbies they like, they're healthy, but the romantic  relationship is sort of on the rocks. Now, most people might look at this life and think  like 'oh that's great they've got a good thing

going", but they look at their own life and  they think "my life's a mess I'm such a loser" all because of that one thing. That's All or  Nothing Thinking, when you reduce something to its extremes just seeing the black or the  white without seeing that grey in the middle. The final cognitive distortion I'm going to talk about  today is called Catastrophizing. This is when you only consider the worst possible explanations for  something, rather than the more likely explanations.

For example, imagine you're waiting for a family  member to get home from work. They're fifteen minutes late and you start thinking "they must have  been in a car accident. Why else would they be late?" When in reality just stuck at work for 15 minutes  or stuck in traffic, and that's catastrophizing. You jump to the most drastic explanations without  considering what's more likely. Now that I look back at my own experience giving presentations,  I can see how cognitive distortions played a

role. You know, my presentations, they weren't  perfect. I'd stumble over my words and forget a few things, but it wasn't a big deal. In a 20  minute presentation, it might have been two or three minutes that were a little choppy. Now the  good thing about cognitive distortions, is once you learn to spot them you can start to challenge  them and by doing this you can change how you think and you can change how you feel and in the  long run this will improve your mental health. [Music]

